---
title: Botulism
template: index.jade
---

Botulism is caused by a paralyzing nerve toxin generated by _Clostridium botulinum_ cells.  The toxin is usually consumed with foods not prepared or stored properly, but it can also be absorbed through the skin directly.  It first affects the face within 8-36 hours and later will spread throughout the whole body.  Botulism poisoning has a 70% mortality rate if untreated and is considered a medical emergency if a case is reported.  Most cases are in infants, where babies are given items containing honey or corn syrup; never give these foods to infants younger than 1 year old.</p><p>The toxin can be destroyed by heating foods to 185° F / 85° C for five minutes or longer.  This toxin has been found in a wide variety of foods:  canned corn, peppers, green beans, soups, beets, asparagus, mushrooms, olives, spinach, smoked and salted fish, lobster, ham, sausage and chicken as well as many other foods that are not acidic enough to stop the growth of the organism.

The botulinum cells are created by spores, which are very difficult to kill when preserving food.  These spores are commonly found in soil all over the world and will create cells (who then create the toxin within 3 or 4 days of growth) with the following conditions.

* A moist, low acid food ([pH](../../terminology/ph.html) > 4.6)
* Temperature between 40° and 120° F / 4.4° and 48.8° C
* Less than 2% oxygen


Sources
=======

* [FDA](../../sources/fda.html) - Bad Bug Book
* [MedicineNet](../../sources/medicinenet.html) - Botulism
* [PubMed](../../sources/pubmed.html) - Botulism
